hi this is pressed Hall Walker let's
play the mathematical game of spin until
you lose you have a wheel with three
values of end $1 and $2 you spin the
wheel until it lands on one of the
values if it lands on one or two dollars
you bank that amount of money in this
case $1 and then you spin the wheel
again if you end up on $2 on your next
spin you get to add that amount to your
bank so now we have a total of three
dollars in the bank and we keep spinning
the wheel if we land on the value of end
that means the game is over and we cash
out whatever value we banked so in this
game we've won three dollars the puzzle
for you is if you play this game how
much do you expect to win on average
some of the games you're going to end up
you know finishing on end right away
other games you may continue to keep
spinning and win more and more the
puzzle to you is how much money do you
win on average if you solve that problem
also give the problem of the general
case a try
imagine a wheel that has values that go
up from $1 all the way up to n dollars
each space on the wheel is equally
likely to be landed on when you spin the
wheel the same rules apply you keep
spinning the wheel and banking money
until you land on the value of end in
which case you cash out the banked
amount how much money do you win in the
general case give these problems a try
and when you're ready keep watching the
video for the solution if you try and
solve this by explicitly calculating how
many ways you can win one dollar two
dollars and so on it's going to be an
infinite series that's very difficult to
solve so there is a trick let's imagine
we have a variable X which denotes the
average winnings of our gameplay
we can split up X into the three
different outcomes for the first turn
this is known as the law of total
expectation so we can either consider X
as landing on end on the first term we
can consider landing on one dollar on
the first term or we can consider
landing on two dollars on the first term
each of these are equally likely now if
we land on end then on the first turn
there's a one-third chance that we're
going to end up with $0 we simply end
the game what happens if we land on $1
on our first turn in that case we're
going to get $1 in our bank and
essentially we start the game exactly
over because once you banked $1 it's
like you started the game from scratch
you're going to expect going forward a
total value of x dollars so if you land
on one on your first turn then you're
going to expect $1 more than X so
there's a one-third chance you'll end up
getting X plus one dollars similarly if
you land on $2 on your first turn it's
as if the game has started over except
you have an extra $2 so your expectation
in this case will be that you're going
to expect to make $2 more than X so if
we combine this in the expectation we
have an expression for X we can now
simplify this I'm going to group out the
one-third term I'm going to have 2x and
then we have the sum of the dollar
values of 0 1 & 2 we end up solving that
X is equal to $3 and this is interesting
our average value is equal to the sum of
1 and $2 which are the values on the
wheel is this true over the general case
let's find out and prove that it
actually is true for the general case so
if we have a wheel that goes from $1 all
the way up by $1 increments to n dollars
we denote X as our average winnings and
then we're going to split up X into all
the different values that we land on the
fur
turn these are all equally likely and
it's going to give us an expectation
based on what we land on for the first
turn if we land on n dollars remember
we're going to expect n dollars more
than X so we now have this interesting
expression and the numbers on the right
go from 0 1 all the way up to n so these
are the number this is equal to the sum
of the numbers from 1 to n which is a
familiar formula of n times n plus 1
over 2 we simplify this expression and
we find out that the amount that you
expect to win is equal to n times n plus
1 over 2 which is the sum of all the
values on the wheel so it's a kind of
interesting result that this probability
game you end up with the sum of the
numbers from 1 to n did you figure it
out thanks for watching this video
please subscribe to my channel I make
videos on math and game theory you can
catch me on my blog mind your decisions
which you can follow on Facebook Google+
and patreon you can catch me on social
media at fresh tile Walker and if you
liked the video please check out my
books I provided links in the video
description